## Pagination in Mongo

Pagination in Mongo can be achieved with two approaches:
- using [`cursor.skip`](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/method/cursor.skip/) / [`cursor.limit`](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/method/cursor.limit/)
- using [`ObjectId`](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/bson-types/#objectid) / [`cursor.limit`](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/method/cursor.limit/)

## Using `cursor.skip` and `cursor.limit`

The `skip-limit` process is as follows:
- you query Mongo for the data you need using [`db.collection.find()`](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/method/db.collection.find/#db.collection.find) which returns you a cursor to those documents
- you apply `skip`, which controls where MongoDB begins returning results 
- you apply `limit`, which specifies the maximum number of documents the cursor will return

## Putting it all together

Imagine you have a `transactions` collection that contains 500 entries and you would like to see a list of objects in blocks of 100

To return the first 100 transactions in the database you can run:
```javascript
db.transactions.find().limit(100) 
```

If you want to return another 100 transactions, after the first block of 100, you can run:
```javascript
db.transactions.find().skip(100).limit(100)
```

Seems quite straightforward! However, the biggest drawback of this approach is that it requires the server to scan from **the beginning of the input results set** before beginning to return results. As the offset increases, `skip()` will become slower. This is where using `ObjectId` steps in to save the day!

## Using `ObjectId` and `cursor.limit`

ObjectId's in Mongo are 12-byte **ordered** strings, consisting of:
- a 4-byte *timestamp value*, representing the ObjectId’s creation, measured in seconds since the Unix epoch
- a 5-byte *random value*
- a 3-byte *incrementing counter*, initialized to a random value

As highlighted above, due to the fact that they are *ordered*, we can easily compare two keys using `>` and `<` signs.

Furthermore, ObjectId's contain a [unique index](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/core/index-unique/#index-type-unique), making them an ideal candidate to be used in filter conditions.

### Putting it all together

Imagine you have a `transactions` collection that contains 500 entries and you would like to see a list of objects in blocks of 100.

To return the first 100 transactions in the database you would still run:
```javascript
db.transactions.find().limit(100) 
```

However, if you wanted to return another 100 transactions, you would have to do the following:
- make note of the `_id` field of the last document returned in the first block of 100 transactions (let's suppose this is `123382u5au8oi09ao5e4819a`)
- retrieve another batch of 100 documents whose `_id` field is greater than `123382u5au8oi09ao5e4819a`

```javascript
db.transactions.find( { _id: { $gt: lastValue } } )
```

And here you have it!
